when you think of the prejudice and bias
we tend to think about stupid and evil
people doing stupid and evil things and
this idea is nicely summarized by the
British critic William Hazlitt who wrote
prejudice is a child of ignorance I want
to try to convince you hear that this is
mistaken I want to try to convince you
that prejudice and bias are natural
they're often rational and are often
even moral and I think that once we
understand this we're in a better
position to make sense of them when they
go wrong when they have horrible
consequences and we're in a better
position to know what to do when this
happens so start with stereotypes you
look at me you know my name you know
certain facts about me and you can make
certain judgments you could make guesses
about my ethnicity my political
affiliation my religious beliefs and the
thing is these judgments tend to be
accurate we're very good at this sort of
thing and we're very good at this sort
of thing because our ability to
stereotype people is not some sort of
arbitrary quirk of the mind but rather
it's a it's a specific instance of a
more general process which is that we
have experience with things and people
in the world that fall into categories
and we could use our experience to make
generalizations about novel instances of
these categories so everybody here in
scene that has a lot of experience with
chairs and apples and dogs and based on
this you could see the unfamiliar
examples and you could guess you could
sit on the chair you could eat the apple
the dog will bark now we might be wrong
the chair could collapse if you sit on
it the Apple might be poisoned the dog
might not bark in fact this is my dog
Tessie who doesn't bark but but for the
most part we're good at this for the
most part we make good guesses both in a
social domain and a non social domain
and if we weren't able to do so who
weren't able to make guesses about new
instances that we encounter we wouldn't
survive and in fact hazlit later on and
his wonderful essay concedes this he
writes without to aid of prejudice or
custom I shall not be able to find my
way across the room nor know how to
conduct
myself in any circumstances nor what to
feel in any relation of life or take
bias now sometimes we break the world up
into us versus them into any group
versus out-group and sometimes when we
do this we know we're doing something
wrong and what kind of shamed of it but
other times we're proud of it we openly
acknowledge it and my favorite example
of this is a question that came from the
audience in the Republican debate prior
to the last election gets it gets to
your gets to your question the question
in the hall on foreign aid yes ma'am
the American people are suffering in our
country right now why do we continue to
send foreign aid to other countries when
we need all the help we can get for
ourselves Governor Perry and what about
that I mean absolutely I think is each
of the people on stage agreed with the
premise of her question which is as
Americans we should care more about
Americans and about other people and in
fact in general people are often swayed
by feelings of solidarity loyalty pride
patriotism towards their country or
towards her ethnic group regardless of
your politics many people feel proud to
be American and a favored Americans over
other countries residents of other
countries feel the same about their
nation and we feel the same with our
ethnicities now some of you may reject
us some of you may be so cosmopolitan
that you think that you that ethnicity
and nationality told no moral sway but
even you sophisticates accept that there
should be some pull towards the in-group
in the domain of friends and family of
people you're close to and so even you
make a distinction we US versus them now
this distinction is is natural enough
and often moral enough but it can go
awry and this was part of the research
of the great social psychologists on
ratash Ville tosh.o was born in Poland
in 1919 he left to go to university in
France because as a Jew he couldn't go
to university in Poland and then he
enlisted in the French military in World
War two he was captured and ended up
ended up in a prisoner of war camp and
it was a terrifying time for him because
if it was discovered he was a Jew he
could have been moved to a concentration
camp where he most likely would not have
survived and in fact when the war ended
and he was released
most of his friends and family were dead
he got involved in different pursuits he
helped out the war orphans but he had a
long lasting interest in this sort of
science of prejudice and so when a
prestigious British scholarship on
stereotypes opened up he applied for it
and he won it and then he began as
amazing career and what started his
career as an insight that the way most
people were thinking about the Holocaust
was wrong many people most people at the
time viewed the Holocaust is sort of
representing some tragic flaw on the
part of the Germans some genetic paint
some authoritarian personality and Taj
fell rejected us Taj fell said what we
see in the Holocaust is just an
exaggeration of normal psychological
processes that exist in every one of us
and to explore this he did a series of
plastic studies with British adolescents
and in one of his studies what he did
was he asked to British adolescence all
sorts of questions and then based on
their answer he said I've looked at your
answers and based on answers I have
determined that you are either he told
half of them a Kandinsky lover you love
the work of Kandinsky or a Klee lover
you love the work of Klee it was
entirely bogus they're answering that
nothing to have Kandinsky or Klee they
probably even heard of the artists he
just arbitrarily divided them up but
what he found was these categories
mattered so when he later gave her
subjects money they would prefer to give
the money to members of their own group
then members of the other group worse
they were actually most interests in
establishing a difference between their
group and other groups so they would
give up money for their own group if by
doing so they could give the other group
even less um this bias seems to show up
very early so my colleague and wife
Karen Wynn at Yale has done a series of
studies with babies where she exposes
babies to puppets and the puppets have
certain food preferences so one at a
puppet might like green beans the other
puppet might like graham crackers they
test the baby's own food preference
that's a baby and babies typically
prefer the graham crackers but the
question is does this matter to babies
in how they treat the puppets and it
matters a lot they tend to prefer the
puppet who has the same food taste that
they have
and worse they actually prefer puppets
who punish the puppet with the different
food taste we we see this sort of
in-group out-group psychology all the
time we see it in political clashes
within groups with different ideologies
we see it in its extreme in cases of war
where the out-group isn't merely sort of
given less but dehumanized as in that
the Nazi perspective of Jews as vermin
or lice or the American perspective of
Japanese as rats stereotypes can also go
awry so often they're rational and
useful but sometimes they're irrational
to give the wrong answers and other
times they lead to plainly immoral
consequences and the case that's been
most studied is the case of race there
was a fascinating study prior to 2008
election where social psychologists
looked at the extent to which the
candidates were associated with America
as an an unconscious association with
American flag and in one of their
studies they compared Obama and McCain
and they found McCain as more it's
thought of as more American than Obama
and to some extent people aren't that
surprised by hearing that McCain is a
celebrated war hero and many people
would explicitly say he has more of an
American story than Obama but they also
compared Obama to British Prime Minister
Tony Blair and they found that Blair was
also thought of as more American than
Obama
even though subjects explicitly
understood he's not American at all but
they were responding of course to the
color of his skin
these stereotypes and biases have
real-world consequences both subtle and
very important and one recent study
researchers put ads on eBay for the sale
of baseball cards some of them were were
held by white hands others by black
hands they were the same baseball cards
the ones held by black hands got
substantially smaller bids than the ones
held by white hands in research done at
Stanford psychologists explored that the
case of people sentenced for the murder
of a white person it turns out holding
everything else constant you are
considerably
more likely to be executed if you look
like the man on the right then a man on
the left and this is in large part
because the man on the right looks more
prototypically black more prototypically
african-american and it's apparently
influences people's decisions over what
to do about them so now that we know
about this how do we combat it and there
are different avenues one Avenue is to
appeal to people's emotional responses
to real appeal to people's empathy and
we often do that through stories so if
you if you are a liberal parent and you
want to encourage your children to
believe in the merits of non-traditional
families you might give them a book like
this if you are conservative and have a
different attitude you might give them a
book like this but but in general
stories can turn anonymous strangers
into people who matter and and the idea
that that we care about people when he
focus on them as individuals is an idea
which has shown up across history so
Stalin appraoch roughly said a single
death is a tragedy a million death is a
statistic and mother Teresa said if I
look at the mass I will never act if I
look at the one I will psychologists
have explored this for instance in one
study people were given a list of facts
about a crisis and and it was seen how
much they would donate to solve this
crisis and another group was given no
facts at all but they were told about an
individual and given a name and given a
face and it turns out that they gave far
more none of this I think is a secret to
the people who are engaged in charity
work they people don't tend to deluge
people with facts and statistics rather
you show them faces you show them and
people it's possible that by extending
our sympathies to an individual they can
spread to the group that the individual
belongs to this is Harriet Beecher Stowe
the story perhaps apocryphal is that
President Lincoln invited her to the
White House in the middle of the Civil
War and said to her so you're the little
lady who started this great war and he
was talking about Uncle Tom's Cabin
Uncle Tom's Cabin is not a great book of
philosophy or theology or perhaps not
even literature but but it does a great
job of getting people to put themselves
in the shoes of
they wouldn't otherwise be in the shoes
of it put himself in the shoes of slaves
and that could have been well have been
a catalyst for great social change
more recently looking at America in the
last several decades there's some
reasonably that shows like The Cosby
Show radically changed American
attitudes towards African Americans
while shows like Will & Grace and Modern
Family
changed American attitudes towards gay
men and women I don't think it's an
exaggeration to say that the major
catalyst in America for moral change has
been a situation comedy but it's not all
emotions and I want to end by appealing
to the power of reason at some point in
this wonderful book of better angels of
our nature Steven Pinker says you know
the Old Testament says love thy neighbor
and the New Testament says love thy
enemy but I don't love either one of
them not really but I don't want to kill
them I know I have obligations to them
but my feelings my moral feelings didn't
my moral beliefs about about how I
should behave towards them our ground
didn't love what they're granted an
understanding of human rights a belief
that their life is as valuable to them
as my life is to me and to support as he
tells a story by the great philosopher
Adam Smith and I want to tell the story
to that I'm gonna modify it a little bit
for modern times
so Adam Smith starts by asking you to
imagine to death of thousands of people
and imagine of the thousands of people
in a country you are not familiar with
could be China or India or a country in
Africa and Smith says how would you
respond and you would say well that's
too bad and you'd go on to rest of your
life if you were to open up the New York
Times online or something and discover
this and in fact this happens to us all
the time we go about our lives but
imagine instead Smith says you were to
learn that tomorrow you were to have
your little finger chopped off Smith
says that would matter a lot you would
not sleep that night wondering about
that so this raises the question would
you sacrifice thousands of lives to save
your little finger now answer this in
the privacy of your own head but but
Smith says absolutely not what a horrid
thought and so this raises the question
and so as Smith puts it when our passive
feelings are almost always so sordid and
so selfish how comes it that our active
principal should often be so generous
and so noble and Smith's answer is it is
reason principal conscience this calls
to us with a voice capable of
astonishing the most presumptuous of our
passions that we are but one of the
multitude in no respect better than any
other in it and this last part is what
is often described as a principle of
impartiality and this principle of
impartiality manifests itself in all of
the world's religions and all of the
different versions of the golden rule
and in all of the world's moral
philosophies which differ in many ways
but share the presupposition that we
should judge morality from sort of an
impartial point of view the best
articulation of this view is actually
for me is not from a theologian or from
a philosopher but from Humphrey Bogart
at the end of Casablanca so spoiler
alert he's telling him telling his lover
that they have to separate for judge
more general good and he says her and I
won't do the accent but he says sir it
doesn't take much to see that the
problems of three little people don't
amount to a hill of beans in this crazy
world a reason could cause us to
override our passions our reason could
motivate us to extend our empathy could
motivate us to write a book like Uncle
Tom's Cabin or read a book like Uncle
Tom's Cabin and our reason can motivate
us to create customs and taboos and laws
that will constrain us from acting upon
our impulses when as rational beings we
feel we should be constrained this is
what a constitution is a constitution
something which was set up in the past
that applies now in the present and what
it says is no matter how much we might
want to re-elect a popular president for
a third term no matter how much white
Americans might choose to feel that they
want to reinstate the institution of
slavery we can't we have bound ourselves
and we bind ourselves in other ways as
well we know that when it comes to
choosing somebody for a job for any for
an award we are strongly biased by their
race we are biased by their their gender
we're advised by how attractive they are
and sometimes we might say well find
that's the way it should be but other
times we say this is wrong and so to
combat this we don't just try harder but
rather what we do is we set up
situations where these other sources of
information can't bias us which is why
many orchestras are dish
musicians behind screens so the only
information they have is information
they believe should matter
I think prejudice and bias illustrate
the fundamental duality of human nature
we have gut feelings instincts emotions
and they affect our judgments and our
actions for good and for evil but we are
also capable of rational deliberation
and intelligent planning and we can use
these to in some cases accelerate and
nourish our emotions and in other cases
staunch them and it's in this way that
reason helps us create a better world
thank you